# **Figure and Table Generating Scripts Documentation**
For now, I’ll treat my Github repo located at ~jpan/aquaptc/bmom6\_tcdiag/paper1\_post (on NCAR glade) as the root for all paths below. Make sure to set the correct paths within /paths.py: CAMGR should point to the SCRIP file for the atmospheric mesh, and ARCHRT should contain the directories known as $DOUT\_S\_ROOT in CESM parlance.

## **Shared .py variables and routines**
**Script Locations:** `/`

* **`paths.py`**: contains paths to raw model output, experiment ALIASES, and panel index mapping for Figs. 3,6,9,11
* **`consts.py`**: physical constants
* **`sznl_funcs.py**: `monthly2sznl()` converts monthly means to meteorological season means. `stack_hemi_sznl()` mirrors DJF,MAM about the equator and stacks them with JJA,SON to combine equal-and-opposite seasons in hemispherically symmetric model configurations.

## **PP1: Preprocessing TC trajectories in TempestExtremes**
**Script Locations:** `/TC_preprocess/`

* **`par-track_driver.py`**: runs `par-track-aqua.derecho_worker.sh`, which generates TempestExtremes TC trajectories using DetectNodes and StitchNodes for each experiment using .h1i. files
* **`trajSN_to_df.py`**: parses the output from TempestExtremes StitchNodes (`par-track_driver.py`) into a pandas dataframe, saving as csv and parquet
* **`seedlog_merge.py`**: scrapes log files of un/seeding interventions to create tables of the vortex params for each intervention
* **`nff_driver.py`**: runs `nff_gen_TC_masks.sh`, which generates (using the .h1i. files and the output of `par-track_driver.py`) binary masks covering the region surrounding each node where wind speed exceeds X m/s

## **PP1A: Preprocessing TC trajectory statistics**
**Script Locations:** `/TC_stats/`

* **`seed_success_rate.py`**: calculates the proportion of seeded vortices that match a TempestExtremes trajectory. Flags each trajectory in the csv/parquet output by `trajSN_to_df.py` by whether it was seeded.
* **`unseed_success_rate.py`**: calculates the proportion of unseeded vortices that match a TempestExtremes trajectory. Flags each node in the csv/parquet output by `trajSN_to_df.py` by whether it corresponds to an unseeding intervention and flags each trajectory by whether it received or was eligible (based on hemisphere/date) to receive an unseeding attempt.
* **`track_dens.py`**: ingests the outputs of the preceding 2 scripts and `seedlog_merge.py`. Outputs a netcdf with seasonal- and latitude-binned TC genesis/lysis/node/ACE normalized by area. Also outputs a csv of seasonally aggregated and hemispherically separated TC counts/activity metrics.

## **PP2: Preprocessing coordinate aggregations/interpolations**
**Script Locations:** `/preprocess/`

* **`hy2pres_driver.py`**: runs `hy2pres_gnupar.sh`, which vertically interpolates CESM CAM output from native hybrid coordinates to pressure coordinates
* **`zonmean_driver.py`**: runs `ux_zonmean.py`, which takes the zonal mean of raw model output on unstructured meshes. User must specify vars and latitude interval via command line
* **`struct_zonmean.py`**: calls the cdo (Climate Data Operators) zonmean operator on user-selected vars from MOM6 output
* **`glob_rgnl_avg.py`**: takes the area-weighted average of user-defined/specified vars from raw model (CAM) output on unstructured meshes. Latitude bounds can be specified. For 3D vars, the vertical mass-weighted integral \int dp/g is first taken over native model levels, with support for bounds of integration

## **Figs. 1–2: UNSEED/MSEED restarts**
**Script Location:** `/plt_restart_mod.py`

### **Execution Instructions**
Run the script after configuring the following variables at the top of the file:

* **`DIRO`**: Output directory where the generated figures will be saved.
* **`RSDIR`**: Parent directory that contains the date-specific CESM restart folder.
* **`DTSTR`**: Datetime string of the restart. The NetCDF files containing the model restart fields are expected to be located in `{RSDIR}/{DTSTR}`.
* **`EVNTS`**: Path to the Parquet file containing the un/seeding interventions data.
* **`CLAT`, `CLON`**: Central latitude and longitude coordinates of the un/seeding intervention you want to plot. These must be manually specified and can be obtained from the CSV or Parquet file containing the interventions list (or from the raw intervention logs).

## **Fig. 3: Genesis seasonality**
**Script Location:** `/TC_gen_binned.py`

### **Preprocessing requirements**
* **PP1**: run `par-track_driver.py` and `trajSN_to_df.py` to obtain TC trajectories
* **PP2**: run `zonmean_driver.py` with `VARS = 'SST'` and `TAPE = 'atm/hist/*.h1i.*.nc'` to obtain (sub)daily zonal-mean SSTs

Run the script after configuring the following variables at the top of the file:
* **`TRAJPQS`**: List of paths pointing to the TC trajectory parquets generated by `trajSN_to_df.py`
* **`SSTZM`**: relative path of the high-frequency zonal-mean SST generated by `zonmean_driver.py`

## **Fig. 4: Summed TC counts/ACE**
**Script Location:** `/TC_climo_tbl.py`

### **Preprocessing requirements**
* **PP1**: run `par-track_driver.py` and `trajSN_to_df.py` to obtain TC trajectories
* **PP1A**: run all scripts in under PP1A

### **Execution Instructions**
Run the script after setting the global var `FILI` to point to the seasonally aggregated TC activity csv from `track_dens.py`

## **Fig. 5: TC lifecycles vs. latitude**
**Script Location:** `/plt_track_dens_1.py`

### **Preprocessing requirements**
Same as Fig. 4

### **Execution Instructions**
Run the script after setting the global var `FILI` to point to the NetCDF output from `track_dens.py`

## **Fig. 6: TC lifetime max intensity**
**Script Location:** `/plt_lmi_psl.py`

### **Preprocessing requirements**
**PP1**: run `par-track_driver.py` and `trajSN_to_df.py` to obtain TC trajectories

### **Execution Instructions**
Run the script after setting the global vars `DIRI`,`FILI` to point to the parquet output from `trajSN_to_df.py`

## **Fig. 7: Unseeding efficacy stats**
**Script Location:** `/efficacy_stats.py`

### **Preprocessing requirements**
Same as Fig. 4

### **Execution Instructions**
Run the script after configuring the following variables at the top of the file. This script also produces *Table 2: seeding efficacy stats*.

* **`FILI`**: path to the csv output from `track_dens.py`
* **`DIRE`**: Directory that contains the parquets of un/seeding interventions from `seedlog_merge.py`
* **`EVNTS`**: list of tuples where the first element is the parquet of interventions, and the second is the type of intervention (us=unseed, sd=seed). Elements of the list should be *None* instead of tuple if no interventions were imposed as is the case in CTL.

## **Figs. 8,10: Area-averaged state metrics**
**Script Location:** `/plt_aavg_tbl.py`

### **Preprocessing requirements**
**PP2**: run `glob_rgnl_avg.py` to area-average (and vertically integrate) model output fields

### **Execution Instructions**
Run the script after setting the global var `FILI` to the basename of the output from `glob_rgnl_avg.py`, assuming `DIRIS` point to the directories where `FILI` is located

## **Fig. 9: Zonal-mean atmosphere/ocean heat content**
**Script Location:** `/plt_thermo_state.py`

### **Preprocessing requirements**
* **PP2 (CAM)**: run `hy2pres_driver.py` to interpolate monthly mean h0a output from native vertical levels to pressure levels.
* **PP2 (CAM)**: after vertical interpolation, run `zonmean_driver.py` with `VARS = 'Z3,T,Q'` and `TAPE = 'atm/hist_onpres_gnupar/*.h0a.*.nc'` to obtain monthly zonal-mean static energy terms.
* **PP2 (MOM)**: run `struct_zonmean.py` with `VARS = 'thetao,oml'` to obtain monthly zonal-mean ocean pot temp and MLD.

### **Execution Instructions**
Run the script after setting `AFIL`,`OFIL` to the relative path of the preprocessed atm/ocn zonal means within ARCHRT(DOUT\_S\_ROOT).

## **Fig. 11: Zonal-mean and TC-masked zonal surface stress**
**Script Location:** `/plt_TC_masked_flds.py`

### **Preprocessing requirements**
* **PP1**: run `par_track_driver.py` and `nff_driver.py` to mask model output with TC outer radii
* **PP2**: run `zonmean_driver.py` with `VARS = 'TAUX'` and `TAPE = 'atm/hist/*.h1i.*.nc'` to obtain the total zonal-mean zonal stress. Run again with `TAPE = 'atm/nff_4mps/*.h1i.*.nc'` to obtain the TC-masked zonal stress.

### **Execution Instructions**
Run the script after setting `TOTFIL`,`TCSFIL` to the relative path of the PP2 outputs within ARCHRT(DOUT\_S\_ROOT).

## **Table 1: Experiment descriptions and Reed vortex params**
**Script Location:** `/methods_tbl.py`
The only table entries that are dynamically computed are annual intervention count and the vortex params: dp, rp, phi\_c

### **Preprocessing requirements**
**PP1**: run `seedlog_merge.py` for each experiment to tabulate un/seeding interventions

### **Execution Instructions**
Run the script after setting `DIRI`,`EVNTS` to point to the parquet outputs from `seedlog_merge.py`.

## **Table 2: Seeding efficacy stats**
Follow the instructions for *Fig. 7: unseeding efficacy stats*.
